commanded his countenance and tones, and related
the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice
suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a
volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change
to an expression of the wildest rage as he shrieked out
imprecations on his persecutor.
His tale is connected, and told with an
appearance of the simplest truth; yet I own to you that
the letters of Felix and Safie, which he showed me,
and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship
brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his
narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and
connected. Such a monster has, then, real existence! I
cannot doubt it; yet I am lost in surprise and
admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from
Frankenstein the particulars of his creature’s
formation: but on this point he was impenetrable.
‘Are you mad, my friend?’ said he; ‘or whither
does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also
create for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy?
Peace, peace! learn my miseries, and do not seek to
increase your own.’
Frankenstein discovered that I made notes
concerning his history: he asked to see them, and then
himself corrected and augmented them in many
places; but principally in giving the life and spirit to
the conversations he held with his enemy. ‘Since you
have preserved my narration,’ said he, ‘I would not
that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.
Thus has a week passed away, while I have
listened to the strangest tale that ever imagination
formed. My thoughts, and every feeling of my soul,
have been drunk up by the interest for my guest,
which this tale, and his own elevated and gentle
manners, have created. I wish to soothe hime; yet can I
counsel one so infinitely miserable, so distitute of
every hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no! the only joy
that he can now know will be when he composes his
shattered spirit to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one
comfort, the offspring of solitude and delirium: he
that when in dreams he holds converse with