scores. Now it is this list of previous board positions that
is used to look up board positions while at a ply level of
3 in the subsequent games. If a board position is found,
its score has, in effect, already been backed up by three
levels, and if it becomes etfective in determining the
move to be made, it is a 6-ply score rather than a simple
3-ply score. This new initial board position with its 6-ply
score is, in turn, saved and ‘it may be encountered in a
future game and the score backed up by an additional
set of three levels, et cetera. This procedure is illustrated
in Fig. 3. The incorporation of this variation, together
with the simpler rote-learning feature. results in a fairly
powerful learning technique which has been studied in
some detail.
Several additional features had to be incorporated into
the program before it was practical to embark on learn-
ing studies using this storage scheme. In the first place,
it was necessary to impart a sense of direction to the pro-
gram in order to force it to press on toward a win. To
illustrate this, consider the situation of two kings against
one king, which is a winning combination for practically
all variations in board positions. In time, the program
can be assumed to have stored all of these variations,
each associated with a winning score. Now, if such a
situation is encountered, the program will look ahead
along all possible paths and each path will lead to a win-
ning combination, in spite of the fact that only one of
the possible initial moves may be along the direct path
toward the win while all of the rest may be wasting time.
How is the program to differentiate between these?
A good solution is to keep a record of the ply value of
the different board positions at all times and to make a
further choice between board positions on this basis. If
ahead, the program can be arranged to push directly
toward the win while, if behind, it can be arranged to
adopt delaying tactics. The most recent method used is
to carry the effective ply along with the score by simply
decreasing the magnitude of the score a small amount
each time it is backed-up a ply level during the analyses.
If the program is now faced with a choice of board posi-
tions whose scores differ only by the ply number, it will
automatically make the most advantageous choice,
choosing a low-ply alternative if winning and a high-ply
alternative if losing. The significance of this concept of a
direction sense should not be overlooked. Even without
“learning,” it is very important. Several of the early at-
tempts at learning failed because the direction sense was
not properly taken into account.
Cataloging and culling stored information
Since practical considerations limit the number of board
positions which can be saved, and since the time to
search through those that are saved can easily become
unduly long, one must devise systems (1) to catalog
boards that are saved, (2) to delete redundancies, and
(3) to discard board positions which are not believed to
be of much value. The most effective cataloging system
found to date starts by standardizing all board positions,
first by reversing the pieces and piece positions if it is a
board position in which White is to move, so that all
boards are reported as if it were Black’s turn to move.
This reduces by nearly a factor of two the number of
boards which must be saved. Board positions, in which
all of the pieces are kings, can be reflected about the
diagonals with a possible fourfold reduction in the num-
ber which must be saved. A more compact board repre-
sentation than the one employed during play is also used
so as to minimize the storage requirements.
After the board positions are standardized, they are
grouped into records on the basis of (1) the number of
pieces on the board, (2) the presence or absence of a
piece advantage, (3) the side possessing this advantage,
(4) the presence or absence of kings on the board. :(5) the
side having the so-called “move,” or opposition advan-
tage, and finally (6) the first moments of the pieces about
normal and diagonal axes through the board. During
play, newly acquired board positions are saved in the
memory until a reasonable number have been accumu-
lated, and they are then merged with those on the “mem-
ory tape” and a new memory tape is produced. Board
positions within a record are listed in a serial fashion,
being sorted with respect to the words which define them.
The records are arranged on the tape in the order that
they are most likely to be needed during the course of a
game; board positions with 12 picces to a side coming
first, et cetera. This method of cataloging is very impor-
tant because it cuts tape-searching time to a minimum.
Reference must be made, of course, to the board posi-
tions already saved, and this is done by reading the cor-
rect record into the memory and searching through it by
a dichotomous search procedure. Usually five or more
records are held in memory at one time, the exact num-
ber at any time depending upon the lengths of the par-
ticular records in question. Normally, the program calls
three or four new records into memory during each new
move, making room for them as needed, by discarding
the records which have been held the longest.
Two different procedures have been found to be of
value in limiting the number of board positions that are
saved; one based on the frequency of use, and the sec-
ond on the ply. To keep track of the frequency of use,
an age term is carried along with the score. Each new
board position to be saved is arbitrarily assigned an age.
When reference is made to a stored board position,
either to update its score or to utilize it in the look-
ahead procedure, the age recorded for this board position
is divided by two. This is called refreshing. Offsetting
this, each board position is automatically aged by one
unit at the memory merge times (normally occurring
about once every 20 moves). When the age of any one
board position reaches an arbitrary maximum value this
board position is expunged from the record. This is a
form of forgetting. New board positions which remain
unused are soon forgotten, while board positions which
are used several times in succession will be refreshed to
such an extent that they will be remembered even if not
used thereafter for a fairly long period of time. This form
of refreshing and forgetting was adopted on the basis of