Some Studies in Machine Learning
Using the Game of Checkers
Arthur L. Samuel
Abstract: Two machine-learning procedures have been investigated in some detail using the game of
checkers. Enough work has been done to verify the fact that a computer can be programmed so that it will
learn to play a better game of checkers than can be played by the person who wrote the program. Further-
more, it can learn to do this in a remarkably short period of time (8 or 10 hours of machine-playing time)
when given only the rules of the game, a sense of direction, and a redundant and incomplete list of
parameters which are thought to have something to do with the game, but whose correct signs and relative
weights are unknown and unspecified. The principles of machine learning verified by these ‘experiments
are, of course, applicable to many other situations.
Introduction
The studies reported here have been concerned with the
programming of a digital computer to behave in a way
which. if done by human beings or animals, would be
described as involving the process of learning. While
this is not the place to dwell on the importance of ma-
chine-learning procedures, or to discourse on the philo-
sophical aspects,1 there is obviously a very large amount
of work. now done by people, which is quite trivial in its
demands on the intellect but does, nevertheless, involve
some learning. We have at our command computers with
adequate data-handling ability and with sufficient com-
putational speed to make use of machine-learning tech-
niques. but our knowledge of the basic principles of these
techniques is still rudimentary. Lacking such knowledge,
it is necessary to specify methods of problem solution in
minute and exact detail, a time-consuming and costly
procedure, Programming computers to learn from ex-
perience should eventually eliminate the need for much
of this detailed programming effort.
General methods of approach
At the outset it might be well to distinguish sharply be-
tween two general approaches to the problem of machine
learning. One method, which might be called the Neural-
Net Approach. deals with the possibility of inducing
learned behavior into a randomly connected switching
net (or its simulation on a digital computer) as a result
of a reward-and-punishment routine. A second, and
Much more efficient approach, is to produce the equiva-
lent of a highly organized network which has been de-
signed to learn only certain specific things. The first
method should lead to the development of general-pur-
pose learning machines. A comparison between the size
of the switching nets that can be reasonably constructed
or simulated at the present time and the size of the neural
nets used by animals, suggests that we have a long way
to go before we obtain practical devices.2 The second
procedure requires reprogramming for each new applica-
tion, but it is capable of realization at the present time.
The experiments to be described here were based on this
second approach.
Choice of problem
For some years the writer has devoted his spare time to
the subject of machine learning and has concentrated on
the development of learning procedures as applied to
games.3 A game provides a convenient vehicle for such
study as contrasted with a problem taken from life, since
many of the complications of detail are removed.
Checkers, rather than chess,4-7 was chosen because the
simplicity of its rules permits greater emphasis to be
placed on learning techniques. Regardless of the relative
merits of the two games as intellectual pastimes, it is fair
to state that checkers contains all of the basic characteris-
tics of an intellectual activity in which heuristic proce-
dures and learning processes can play a major role and
in which these processes can be evaluated.
Some of these characteristics might well be enumer-
ated. They are:
(1) The activity must not be deterministic in the prac-
tical sense. There exists no known algorithm which will
guarantee a win or a draw in checkers, and the complete